# Installation

This document is WIP and still a mixture of old and new docs.

Large system deployments can get very complex. In this document we explain the GeneNetwork reproducible deployment system which is based on GNU Guix The Guix system can be used to install GN with all its files and dependencies.

Note that the official deployment works through a Guix VM. This is described in

=> ./deployment

# Check list

To run GeneNetwork the following services need to function:

* [ ] GNU Guix with a guix profile for genenetwork2
* [ ] A path to the (static) genotype files
* [?] Gn-proxy for authentication
* [ ] The genenetwork3 service
* [ ] Redis
* [ ] Mariadb

# Installing Guix packages

Make sure to install GNU Guix using the binary download instructions on the main website. Follow the instructions on Note the download amounts to several GBs of data. Debian-derived distros may support

```
apt-get install guix
```

# Creating a GNU Guix profile

We run a GNU Guix channel with packages at

=> https://gitlab.com/genenetwork/guix-bioinformatics

The README has instructions hosting a channel (recommended!), but sometimes we use the GUIX_PACKAGE_PATH instead. First upgrade to a recent guix with

```
mkdir ~/opt
guix pull -p ~/opt/guix-pull
```

It should upgrade (ignore the locales warnings).  You can optionally specify the specific git checkout of guix with

```
guix pull -p ~/opt/guix-pull --commit=f04883d
```

which is useful when you need to roll back to an earlier version (sometimes our channel goes out of sync). Next, we install GeneNetwork2 with

```
source ~/opt/guix-pull/etc/profile
git clone https://git.genenetwork.org/guix-bioinformatics/guix-bioinformatics.git ~/guix-bioinformatics
```

you probably also need guix-past (the upstream channel for older packages):

```
git clone https://gitlab.inria.fr/guix-hpc/guix-past.git ~/guix-past
cd ~/guix-past
env GUIX_PACKAGE_PATH=$HOME/guix-bioinformatics:$HOME/guix-past/modules ~/opt/guix-pull/bin/guix package -i genenetwork2 -p ~/opt/genenetwork2
```

Ignore the warnings. Guix should install the software without trying to build everything. If you system insists on building all packages, try the `--dry-run` switch and fix the [[https://guix.gnu.org/manual/en/html_node/Substitute-Server-Authorization.html][substitutes]]. You may add the `--substitute-urls="http://guix.genenetwork.org https://ci.guix.gnu.org https://mirror.hydra.gnu.org"` switch.

The guix.genenetwork.org has most of our packages pre-built(!). To use it on your own machine the public key is

```
(public-key
 (ecc
  (curve Ed25519)
  (q #9F56EAB5CE37AA15693C31F451140588240F259676C137E31C0CA70EC4D1B534#)
  )
 )
```

Once we have a GNU Guix profile, a running database (see below) and the file storage,
we should be ready to fire up GeneNetwork:

# Running GN2

Check out the source with git:

```
git clone git@github.com:genenetwork/genenetwork2.git
cd genenetwork2
```

You may want to use the testing branch.

Run GN2 with earlier created Guix profile

```
export GN2_PROFILE=$HOME/opt/genenetwork2
env TMPDIR=$HOME/tmp WEBSERVER_MODE=DEBUG LOG_LEVEL=DEBUG SERVER_PORT=5012 GENENETWORK_FILES=/export/data/genenetwork/genotype_files SQL_URI=mysql://webqtlout:webqtlout@localhost/db_webqtl ./bin/genenetwork2 etc/default_settings.py -gunicorn-dev
```

The script comes with  debug and logging switches can be particularly useful when
developing GN2. Location and files are examples.

It may be useful to tunnel the web server to your local browser with an ssh tunnel:

## Testing on an ssh tunnnel

If you want to test a service running on the server on a certain port (say 8202) use

  ssh -L 8202:127.0.0.1:8202 -f -N myname@penguin2.genenetwork.org

And browse on your local machine to http://localhost:8202/

# BELOW INFORMATION NEEDS TO BE UPDATED

* Run gn-proxy

GeneNetwork requires a separate gn-proxy server which handles
authorisation and access control. For instructions see the
[[https://github.com/genenetwork/gn-proxy][README]]. Note it may already be running on our servers!

* Run Redis

Redis part of GN2 deployment and will be started by the ./bin/genenetwork2
startup script.

* Run MariaDB server
** Install MariaDB with GNU GUIx

These are the steps you can take to install a fresh installation of
mariadb (which comes as part of the GNU Guix genenetwork2 install).

As root configure the Guix profile, previously that was

```
. ~/opt/genenetwork2/etc/profile
```

But now we use the recommended

```
/usr/local/guix-profiles/guix-pull/bin/guix install mariadb borg -p /usr/local/guix-profiles/gn-latest
. /usr/local/guix-profiles/gn-latest/etc/profile
```

Exctract the db (that takes a while too)

```
/usr/local/guix-profiles/gn-latest/bin/borg extract /export2/data/wrk/tux01/borg-tux01::borg-backup-mariadb-20240218-06:16-Sun --progress
```

and run for example

```
adduser mariadb
addgroup mariadb (and add user to group)
mkdir -p /export2/mariadb/database
chown mariadb.mariadb -R /export2/mariadb/
mkdir -p /var/run/mysqld
chown mariadb.mariadb /var/run/mysqld
su mariadb
. /usr/local/guix-profiles/gn-latest/etc/profile
mariadb --version
  mariadb  Ver 15.1 Distrib 10.10.2-MariaDB, for Linux (x86_64) using readline 5.1
mariadb_install_db --user=mariadb --datadir=/export2/mariadb/database
mariadbd -u mariadb --datadir=/exportdb/mariadb/database/mariadb --explicit_defaults_for_timestamp -P 12048"
```

If you want to run as root you may have to set /etc/my.cnf

```
[mariadbd]
user=root
```

You also need to set

```
ft_min_word_len = 3
```

To make sure word text searches (shh) work and rebuild the tables if
required.

To check error output in a file on start-up run with something like


```
mariadbd -u mariadb --console  --explicit_defaults_for_timestamp  --datadir=/export/mariadb/tux01_mariadb/latest --log-error=~/test.log
/usr/local/guix-profiles/gn-latest/bin/mariadb -uwebqtlout -pwebqtlout db_webqtl -e 'show tables'
```

When you get errors like:

```
qlalchemy.exc.IntegrityError: (_mariadb_exceptions.IntegrityError) (1215, 'Cannot add foreign key constraint')
```

you may need to set

```
set foreign_key_checks=0
```

The current production my.conf is

```
[mysqld]

# innodb_empty_free_list_algorithm=backoff
innodb_buffer_pool_size=16G
# innodb_ibuf_max_size=2G
innodb_ft_min_token_size=3
# innodb_use_sys_malloc=0
innodb_file_per_table=ON
key_buffer_size=10M

ft_min_word_len = 3

# main = 1 for active master: server A
gtid-domain-id=1

tmpdir=/export/tmp
wait_timeout=180
lc_time_names=en_US
lc_messages=en_US
max_connections=2048
thread_cache_size=16
open_files_limit = 16384
query_cache_type=1                                                                                  query_cache_min_res_unit = 1k
query_cache_limit = 1M
query_cache_size=128M

log_error=/var/log/mysql/error.log
skip-name-resolve

# Skip recovery for now:
innodb_force_recovery=1

# Only when listening to the network!
# bind-address = 0.0.0.0
# port = 3306

slow_query_log=1
slow_query_log_file=/var/log/mysql/mysql-slow.log
long_query_time=60.0
log_queries_not_using_indexes=0
log_warnings=4
log_slow_admin_statements=ON

ft_min_word_len=3

log-bin=/var/lib/mysql/gn0-binary-log
expire-logs-days=120
server-id=1
# Domain = 1 for active master: server A
gtid-domain-id=1

[myisamchk]
sort_buffer_size=4M
ft_min_word_len = 3
```

Note that we handle IP restrictions through the nftables firewall.

The systemd config is

```
[Unit]
Description=MariaDB database server
Documentation=man:mysqld(8)
Documentation=https://mariadb.com/kb/en/library/systemd/
After=network.target

[Install]
WantedBy=multi-user.target
Alias=mysqld.service

[Service]
TimeoutStartSec=infinity
TimeoutStopSec=infinity
LimitNOFILE=infinity
LimitMEMLOCK=infinity

Type=simple
PrivateNetwork=false

User=mariadb
Group=mariadb

CapabilityBoundingSet=CAP_IPC_LOCK                                                                  # Prevent writes to /usr, /boot, and /etc
ProtectSystem=true
                                                                       PrivateDevices=true
# Prevent accessing /home, /root and /run/user
ProtectHome=false

# Execute pre and post scripts as root, otherwise it does it as User=
PermissionsStartOnly=true

ExecStartPre=/usr/bin/install -m 755 -o mariadb -g root -d /var/run/mysqld

ExecStart=/usr/local/guix-profiles/gn-latest/bin/mariadbd --datadir=/export/mariadb/tux01_mariadb/latest $MYSQLD_OPTS $_WSREP_NEW_CLUSTER $_WS
REP_START_POSITION -W

ExecStartPost=/bin/sh -c "systemctl unset-environment _WSREP_START_POSITION"

KillSignal=SIGTERM

SendSIGKILL=no
Restart=on-abort
RestartSec=15s

UMask=007

PrivateTmp=false
```

** Load the small database in MySQL

Currently we have two databases for deployment,
'db_webqtl_s' is the small testing database containing experiments
from BXD mice and 'db_webqtl_plant' which contains all plant related
material.

Download one database from

http://ipfs.genenetwork.org/ipfs/QmRUmYu6ogxEdzZeE8PuXMGCDa8M3y2uFcfo4zqQRbpxtk

After installation unzip the database binary in the MySQL directory

#+BEGIN_SRC sh
cd ~/mysql
p7zip -d db_webqtl_s.7z
chown -R mysql:mysql db_webqtl_s/
chmod 700 db_webqtl_s/
chmod 660 db_webqtl_s/*
#+END_SRC

restart MySQL service (mysqld). Login as root

: mysql_upgrade -u root --force

: myslq -u root

and

: mysql> show databases;
: +--------------------+
: | Database           |
: +--------------------+
: | information_schema |
: | db_webqtl_s        |
: | mysql              |
: | performance_schema |
: +--------------------+

Set permissions and match password in your settings file below:

: mysql> grant all privileges on db_webqtl_s.* to gn2@"localhost" identified by 'webqtl';

You may need to change "localhost" to whatever domain you are
connecting from (mysql will give an error).

Note that if the mysql connection is not working, try connecting to
the IP address and check server firewall, hosts.allow and mysql IP
configuration (see below).

Note for the plant database you can rename it to db_webqtl_s, or
change the settings in etc/default_settings.py to match your path.

* Get genotype files

The script looks for genotype files. You can find them in
http://ipfs.genenetwork.org/ipfs/QmXQy3DAUWJuYxubLHLkPMNCEVq1oV7844xWG2d1GSPFPL

#+BEGIN_SRC sh
mkdir -p $HOME/genotype_files
cd $HOME/genotype_files

#+END_SRC

* GN2 Dependency Graph

List of all runtime dependencies for GN2 as installed by GNU Guix.

https://genenetwork.org/environments/

* Working with the GN2 source code

See [[development.org]].

* Read more

If you want to understand the architecture of GN2 read
[[Architecture.org]].  The rest of this document is mostly on deployment
of GN2.

* Trouble shooting

** ImportError: No module named jinja2

If you have all the Guix packages installed this error points out that
the environment variables are not set. Copy-paste the paths into your
terminal (mainly so PYTHON_PATH and R_LIBS_SITE are set) from the
information given by guix:

: guix package --search-paths

On one system:

: export PYTHONPATH="$HOME/.guix-profile/lib/python3.8/site-packages"
: export R_LIBS_SITE="$HOME/.guix-profile/site-library/"
: export GEM_PATH="$HOME/.guix-profile/lib/ruby/gems/2.2.0"

and perhaps a few more.
** ERROR: 'can not find directory $HOME/gn2_data' or 'can not find directory $HOME/genotype_files/genotype'

The default settings file looks in your $HOME/gn2_data. Since these
files come with a Guix installation you should take a hint from the
values in the installed version of default_settings.py (see above in
this document).

You can use the GENENETWORK_FILES switch to set the datadir, for example

: env GN2_PROFILE=~/opt/gn-latest GENENETWORK_FILES=/gnu/data/gn2_data ./bin/genenetwork2

** Can't run a module

In rare cases, development modules are not brought in with Guix
because no source code is available. This can lead to missing modules
on a running server. Please check with the authors when a module
is missing.
** Rpy2 error 'show' now found

This error

: __show = rpy2.rinterface.baseenv.get("show")
: LookupError: 'show' not found

means that R was updated in your path, and that Rpy2 needs to be
recompiled against this R - don't you love informative messages?

In our case it means that GN's PYTHONPATH is not in sync with
R_LIBS_SITE. Please check your GNU Guix GN2 installation paths,
you man need to reinstall. Note that this may be the point you
may want to start using profiles (see profile section).

** Mysql can't connect server through socket ERROR

The following error

: sqlalchemy.exc.OperationalError: (_mysql_exceptions.OperationalError) (2002, 'Can\'t connect to local MySQL server through socket \'/run/mysqld/mysqld.sock\' (2 "No such file or directory")')

means that MySQL is trying to connect locally to a non-existent MySQL
server, something you may see in a container. Typically replicated with something like

: mysql -h localhost

try to connect over the network interface instead, e.g.

: mysql -h 127.0.0.1

if that works run genenetwork after setting SQL_URI to something like

: export SQL_URI=mysql://gn2:mysql_password@127.0.0.1/db_webqtl_s

* NOTES

** Deploying GN2 official

Let's see how fast we can deploy a second copy of GN2.

- [ ] Base install
  + [ ] First install a Debian server with GNU Guix on board
  + [ ] Get Guix build going
    - [ ] Build the correct version of Guix
    - [ ] Check out the correct gn-stable version of guix-bioinformatics http://git.genenetwork.org/pjotrp/guix-bioinformatics
    - [ ] guix package -i genenetwork2 -p /usr/local/guix-profiles/gn2-stable
  + [ ] Create a gn2 user and home with space
  + [ ] Install redis
    - [ ] add to systemd
    - [ ] update redis.cnf
    - [ ] update database
  + [ ] Install mariadb (currently debian mariadb-server)
    - [ ] add to systemd
    - [ ] system stop mysql
    - [ ] update mysql.cnf
    - [ ] update database (see gn-services/services/mariadb.md)
    - [ ] check tables
  + [ ] run gn2
  + [ ] update nginx
  + [ ] install genenetwork3
    - [ ] add to systemd
