# UTHSC E-mail

Similar to many organizations UT uses outlook and exchange for their E-mail. Thanks to mobile support it is possible to work with email using other tools outside the UT network.

## Prospect E-mail client

People have success using Prospect as an E-mail client. You can follow the instructions on the UT website that are similar to Android support.

## Davmail IMAP bridge

An interesting solution is to create an IMAP bridge. It is a little slower, but can be set up! That way you can use your favorite E-mail tool (and filters!).

I have had success setting up davmail with the following settings and testing with thunderbird first:

```
apt install davmail openjfx thunderbird
```

Start davmail with

```
davmail -d
```

Stop davmail and edit the ~/.davmail.properties file with the following.

```
davmail.mode=O365Interactive
davmail.url=https://outlook.office365.com/EWS/Exchange.asmx
davmail.oauth.clientId=d3590ed6-52b3-4102-aeff-aad2292ab01c
davmail.enableOauth2=true
davmail.oauth.deviceCode=true
davmail.oauth.enableOauth2=true
davmail.oauth.redirectUri=urn:ietf:wg:oauth:2.0:oob
davmail.oauth.tenantId=common
davmail.imapPort=1143
davmail.smtpPort=1025
davmail.logFilePath=/home/yours/.davmail/davmail.log
log4j.logger.httpclient.wire=DEBUG
log4j.rootLogger=DEBUG
log4j.logger.org.apache.http.wire=DEBUG
```

Restart davmail and point thunderbird to

```
IMAP Server: localhost:1143
SMTP Server: localhost:1025
Username: your-email@uthsc.edu
```

Note that you should set the UT password in the 2FA browser when it pops up. Do *not* set it in Thunderbird, also when it asks for it to send out SMTP.

When something fails make sure to track the log in ~/.davmail/davmail.log

# Using Mutt

Some useful links:

=> https://jonathanh.co.uk/blog/exchange-mutt/
=> https://movementarian.org/blog/posts/mutt-and-office365/
=> https://www.vanormondt.net/~peter/blog/2021-03-16-mutt-office365-mfa.html

If someone can get the last one to work we won't even need davmail any more!
