# gn-guile Configurations

## Tags

* type: bug
* assigned:
* priority: high
* status: open
* keywords: gn-guile, markdown editing
* interested: alexk, bonfacem, fredm, pjotrp

## Description

=> https://git.genenetwork.org/gn-guile/ The gn-guile service
is used to enable markdown editing in GeneNetwork.

There are configuration that are needed to get the system to work as expected:

* CURRENT_REPO_PATH: The local path to the cloned repository
* CGIT_REPO_PATH: path to the bare repo (according to docs [gn-guile-docs])

With these settings, we should be able to make changes to make edits. These edits, however, do not get pushed upstream.

Looking at the code
=> https://git.genenetwork.org/gn-guile/tree/web/webserver.scm?id=4623225b0adb0846a4c2e879a33b31884d2e5f05#n212
we see both the settings above being used, and we can further have a look at
=> https://git.genenetwork.org/gn-guile/tree/web/view/markdown.scm?id=4623225b0adb0846a4c2e879a33b31884d2e5f05#n78 the definition of git-invoke.

With the above, we could, hypothetically, do a command like:

```
git -C ${CURRENT_REPO_PATH} push ${REMOTE_REPO_URI} master
```

where REMOTE_REPO_URI can be something like "appuser@git.genenetwork.org:/home/git/public/gn-guile"

That means we change the (git-invoke …) call seen previously to something like:

```
(git-invoke +current-repo-path+ "push" +remote-repo-url+ "master")
```

and make sure that the "+remote-repo-url+" value is something along the URI above.

### Gotchas

We need to fetch and rebase with every push, to avoid conflicts. That means we'll need a sequence such as the following:

```
(git-invoke +current-repo-path+ "fetch" +remote-repo-url+ "master")
(git-invoke +current-repo-path+ "rebase" "origin/master")
(git-invoke +current-repo-path+ "push" +remote-repo-url+ "master")
```

The tests above work with a normal user. We'll be running this code within a container, so we do need to expose a specific private ssh key for the user to use to push to remote. This also means that the corresponding public key should be registered with the repository server.

## References

* [gn-guile-docs] https://git.genenetwork.org/gn-guile/tree/doc/git-markdown-editor.md?id=4623225b0adb0846a4c2e879a33b31884d2e5f05

