# Implement File-Based, and CLI-Based Configuration for "gn-guile"

## Tags

* type: feature
* assigned: fredm
* priority: high
* status: open (awaiting patch(es) review)
* keywords: gn-guile, config, configs, configuration
* interested: alexk, bonfacem, fredm, pjotrp

## Description

We currently use only environment variables to configure the "gn-guile" service. This is not a bad thing, per-se, but there are a few problems with the way we currently do it.

First, we use global variables for the configurations, which can lead to "action at a distance" kind of failures that can be difficult to debug. I propose having an explicit configuration system that follows a known precedence order for the various configurations.

The second issue is  that the naming scheme for the environment variables does not clearly indicate what they do, e.g.

* `CGIT_REPO_PATH`: This environment variable holds the URL or path to a shared, bare repo, that is meant to serve as the remote from which clients and/or users pull and push from/to.
* `CURRENT_REPO_PATH`: This environment variable is supposed to hold the path to the local checkout (or working repository) of the shared remote repository.
* `GN_GUILE_WORKING_BRANCH`: This is the branch in the repository that "gn-guile" will pull/push changes from/to.

### Configuration Precedence

I propose getting rid of the environment variables for now, and using configuration files for the service configuration, and overriding values using the command-line arguments, at least for now.

The conventional precedence rules, from lowest to lowest precedence is:

* Hard-coded defaults
* System configurations ("/etc")
* User's Home configuration ("~/.")
* Local config files ("$(pwd)/.")
* Environment variables
* Command-Line Arguments (CLI)

I propose the introduction of the CLI arguments, and possibly HOME and CWD config files, via the "guile-config" library. The library does not (currently) support use of environment variable, so we can drop use of them for the time being.

Once the configurations have been read, they will be passed to the functions that need them as arguments. In this way, we get rid of the global configuration variables.

### Using Environment Variables

Down the road, should we need to re-introduce environment variables, I propose renaming the variables in the following pattern:

* `CGIT_REPO_PATH` ==> `GN_GUILE_GN_DOCS_REMOTE_URL`
* `CURRENT_REPO_PATH` ==> `GN_GUILE_LOCAL_GN_DOCS_CHECKOUT`
* `GN_GUILE_WORKING_BRANCH` can remain the same, or we can update it to `GN_GUILE_GN_DOCS_WORKING_BRANCH`

etc.

The new names are long, but also indicate the following:

* `GN_GUILE...`: these envvars are used by the "gn-guile" service
* `...GN_DOCS...`: and they are concerned with the "gn-docs" repository
* `...REMOTE_URL`, `...CHECKOUT`, `...WORKING_BRANCH`, etc.: and each environment variable's purpose is disambiguated from the rest, clearly stating what it is about.

### Related Issue(s)

=> issues/gn-guile/Configurations gn-guile Configurations


### Fixes

=> https://git.genenetwork.org/gn-guile/commit/?h=fredm/use-cli-args&id=f0f0ba92544a150f08cf26c56e19988309d7135e
=> https://git.genenetwork.org/gn-guile/commit/?h=fredm/use-cli-args&id=d19fcd79a028e649cb8ab3e42f5796bc353309ed
