# GeneNetwork Gemini Issue Tracker

We have decided to move our existing issue trackers and kanban board to one gemini powered repository! Reasons are:

* Decentralised management
* No dependency on github and others
* Easy editing in emacs/vim etc.
* git version control
* Ownership and the capability for removing text

=> https://gemini.circumlunar.space/docs/gemtext.gmi GemText markdown/markup
=> https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gemini_(protocol) Gemini protocol

Issues are simple gemini documents that grow downwards - dating of additions is managed through git. We'll add a proxy to display these documents. The kanban is managed through a directory and symbolic links.

=> https://github.com/genenetwork/gn-gemtext-threads/blob/main/issues/database-not-responding.gmi Example issue tracker

We will soon add a web readable version of

=> https://genenetwork.org/issues Issue tracker
=> https://genenetwork.org/kanban Kanban board

Other discussions on leaving github

=> https://github.com/bitcoin-core/bitcoin-devwiki/wiki/GitHub-alternatives-for-Bitcoin-Core

## gnbug

You may peruse the issues in this repository using the provided gnbug command-line interface. gnbug requires guile. Please install guile before running gnbug.

List all issues.
```
./gnbug list
```

Only list issues assigned to pjotrp.
```
./gnbug list --assigned=pjotrp
```

Edit an issue, say issue 9. This opens the relevant gemtext file in your favourite editor as defined by the EDITOR environment variable.
```
./gnbug edit 9
```

List issues that were created or updated in the last 3 days, in the last week or month respectively. The --since argument is passed directly to `git log`. Therefore, gnbug understands any --since argument that `git log` understands.
```
./gnubug news --since='3 days'
./gnubug news --since='1 week'
./gnubug news --since='1 month'
```
