# gn-ai search UI/UX enhancements (web-native)

* assigned: bonfacem, johannesm
* status: in-progress

Some improvements for gn-ai UI:

## 1. [ ] Expandable "Reasoning" accordion / Visual pipeline progress (stepper / skeleton screens) - medium

* Extend the backend to return an optional reasoning field (BM25 hits, vector scores, agent scratchpad).
* Render it inside a <details><summary> block in the response partial.
* Keep it collapsed by default.

Web equivalent of terminal tool-use pills.

* Emit structured progress events from HybridSearch.handle() — e.g. bm25:start, bm25:done, vector:start, vector:done, agent:start, agent:done.
* Render a horizontal stepper or skeleton loader above the final answer while the search is in flight.
* Requires SSE or WebSocket to update in real time.


## 2. [X] One-click copy for answers and cards - easy

Web pattern: floating action buttons on message bubbles.

* Add a small "Copy" icon that appears on hover inside each .message-ai bubble.
* Copy the plain-text summary or an individual result card via navigator.clipboard.writeText().
* Show a transient toast or tooltip saying "Copied!"

## 3. [ ] Streaming responses via SSE - medium

* Add /search/stream endpoint that returns text/event-stream.
* Yield the user message immediately, then stream the AI response in chunks as each RAG stage completes.
* Client: use htmx SSE extension or a lightweight EventSource listener that appends chunks to #messages.
* Decide on caching strategy (disable or adapt for partial responses).

## 4. [ ] Persistent conversation threads (sidebar) - hard

* Maintain a conversation array per thread (server-side session or lightweight DB table).
* Inject prior turns into the HybridSearch prompt context.
* Add a left sidebar listing past threads with clickable titles and delete buttons.
* Generate shareable URLs per thread (e.g. /thread/<id>).

## 5. [ ] Auto-expanding search input - easy

Web pattern: textarea that grows with content.

* Replace the single-line <input> with an auto-resizing <textarea>.
* Cap the visible height at ~6 lines and add an internal scrollbar for longer pasted text.
* Keep Enter submitting the form and Shift+Enter inserting a newline.

## 6. [ ] Markdown rendering for summaries - easy

Web pattern: safe markdown-to-HTML conversion.

* Choose markdown-it (server-side Jinja2 filter) or marked (client-side).
* Render the summary field as rich HTML instead of plain text.
* Sanitise the output (Bleach / DOMPurify) before DOM insertion to prevent XSS.

## 7. [X] Smart auto-scroll with scroll-lock - easy

Web pattern: chat containers that respect user scroll position.

* In the htmx:afterSwap listener, check whether the user is already near the bottom:

```
const nearBottom = container.scrollTop + container.clientHeight >= container.scrollHeight - 100;
```

* Only scroll to bottom when nearBottom is true.
* Consider a subtle "New message" indicator when the user is scrolled up.

## 8. [ ] Rating answers - easy

* Add thumbs up/down buttons in UI.
* Track rating in a data store, per session.

## 9. [ ] Display data-tables / Draw Figures - hard

* Display usable data-tables.
* Generate plots in results.

## Bonus web-only ideas

* Dark-mode toggle — persists in localStorage and toggles a data-theme attribute on <html>.
* Toast notifications — replace inline error banners with transient toast messages for copy confirmations, network errors, etc.
* Result export — add "Export to CSV / JSON" buttons for tabular result sets.
