# Genewiki conversion

GeneNetwork1 contains a genewiki:

=> http://gn1.genenetwork.org/webqtl/main.py?FormID=geneWiki&symbol=BRCA2

We want to migrate it to markdown documents that can be fetched from

=> https://github.com/genenetwork/gn-docs/genes

So the steps are to (1) migrate the existing genewiki data in the database to named markdown documents in that repository and (2) create a rendered page that is found through

=> https://genenetwork.org/doc/genes/BRCA2

with an edit button, similar to

=> http://genenetwork.org/facilities/

## Tags

* assigned: pjotrp, zsloan
* type: enhancement
* priority: medium
* status: unclear
* keywords: GN1, documentation

## Tasks

* [ ] Export Genewiki to markdown - one file per gene and store in git@github.com:genenetwork/gn-docs.git
* [ ] Format output for GN using markdown parser (similar to other docs)
* [ ] Provide edit link to github

Later we'll add automated links to wikidata and Uniprot etc.

## Notes

Zach writes: How exactly do we want to store all of this? It appears to currently be
stored across three SQL tables - GeneRIF, GeneRIFXRef, and GeneCategory.
The first contains a row for each item a user adds (when displaying all
items it queries by gene symbol), and the latter two are for storing the
checkbox stuff (so there will presumably be a row in GeneRIFXRef for every
checked box for each symbol, though this isn't totally clear to me because
it's linked by GeneRIF.Id - which isn't unique - rather than GeneRIF.symbol
which is what I would have assumed).

IIRC the issue I ran into (that isn't immediately apparent from looking at
the web page) is that it's currently stored as a list of items. There isn't
a single "free text" area - when a user edits they are either adding a new
text item with its own row in the DB or editing one of the existing items,
so I'm not sure how best to reasonably convert the current contents and
editing method to markdown. Currently it doesn't even support any sort of
user styling/formatting - users just enter basic text into a form. And if
they were converted to markdown, how would we be storing the checkbox
content?

It's probably possible to write a script that goes through those tables and
generates a bunch of markdown files from them (one for each gene symbol, I
think?), with the list of items just being converted into a single markdown
file with those items formatted into a list. This would de-link GN1's
GeneWiki from GN2's in the future, though (since the way things are stored
would be fundamentally changed).

Pj: That is what we want. Create a markdown file for each gene symbol.
Checklist can be part of that using markdown syntax.
