# Python Requests Error in Container

## Tags

* type: bug
* status: open
* assigned: fredm
* priority: critical
* interested: alexk, aruni, bonfacem, pjotrp, zsloan
* keywords: production, container, tux04, python, requests

## Description

Building the container with the
=> https://git.genenetwork.org/guix-bioinformatics/commit/?id=eb7beb340a9731775e8ad177e47b70dba2f2a84f upgraded guix definition
leads to python's requests library failing.

```
2024-10-30 16:04:13 OSError: Could not find a suitable TLS CA certificate bundle, invalid path: /etc/ssl/certs/ca-certificates.crt
```

If you login to the container itself, however, you find that the file `/etc/ssl/certs/ca-certificates.crt` actually exists and has content.

Possible fixes suggested are to set up correct envvars for the requests library, such as `REQUESTS_CA_BUNDLE`

See
=> https://requests.readthedocs.io/en/latest/user/advanced/#ssl-cert-verification

### Troubleshooting Logs

Try reproducing the issue locally:

```
$ guix --version
hint: Consider installing the `glibc-locales' package and defining `GUIX_LOCPATH', along these lines:

     guix install glibc-locales
     export GUIX_LOCPATH="$HOME/.guix-profile/lib/locale"

See the "Application Setup" section in the manual, for more info.

guix (GNU Guix) 2394a7f5fbf60dd6adc0a870366adb57166b6d8b
Copyright (C) 2024 the Guix authors
License GPLv3+: GNU GPL version 3 or later <http://gnu.org/licenses/gpl.html>
This is free software: you are free to change and redistribute it.
There is NO WARRANTY, to the extent permitted by law.
$
$ guix shell --container --network python python-requests coreutils
[env]$ ls "${GUIX_ENVIRONMENT}/etc"
ld.so.cache  profile
```

We see from the above that there are no certificates in the environment with just python and python-requests.

Okay. Now let's write a simple python script to test things out with:

```
import requests

resp = requests.get("https://github.com")
print(resp)
```

and run it!

```
$ guix shell --container --network python python-requests coreutils -- python3 test.py
Traceback (most recent call last):
  File "/tmp/test.py", line 1, in <module>
    import requests
  File "/gnu/store/b6ny4p29f32rrnnvgx7zz1nhsms2zmqk-profile/lib/python3.10/site-packages/requests/__init__.py", line 164, in <module>
    from .api import delete, get, head, options, patch, post, put, request
  File "/gnu/store/b6ny4p29f32rrnnvgx7zz1nhsms2zmqk-profile/lib/python3.10/site-packages/requests/api.py", line 11, in <module>
    from . import sessions
  File "/gnu/store/b6ny4p29f32rrnnvgx7zz1nhsms2zmqk-profile/lib/python3.10/site-packages/requests/sessions.py", line 15, in <module>
    from .adapters import HTTPAdapter
  File "/gnu/store/b6ny4p29f32rrnnvgx7zz1nhsms2zmqk-profile/lib/python3.10/site-packages/requests/adapters.py", line 81, in <module>
    _preloaded_ssl_context.load_verify_locations(
FileNotFoundError: [Errno 2] No such file or directory
```

Uhmm, what is this new error?

Add `nss-certs` and try again.

```
$ guix shell --container --network python python-requests nss-certs coreutils
[env]$ ls ${GUIX_ENVIRONMENT}/etc/ssl/
certs
[env]$ python3 test.py
Traceback (most recent call last):
  File "/tmp/test.py", line 1, in <module>
    import requests
  File "/gnu/store/17dw8qczqqz9fmj2kxzsbfqn730frqd7-profile/lib/python3.10/site-packages/requests/__init__.py", line 164, in <module>
    from .api import delete, get, head, options, patch, post, put, request
  File "/gnu/store/17dw8qczqqz9fmj2kxzsbfqn730frqd7-profile/lib/python3.10/site-packages/requests/api.py", line 11, in <module>
    from . import sessions
  File "/gnu/store/17dw8qczqqz9fmj2kxzsbfqn730frqd7-profile/lib/python3.10/site-packages/requests/sessions.py", line 15, in <module>
    from .adapters import HTTPAdapter
  File "/gnu/store/17dw8qczqqz9fmj2kxzsbfqn730frqd7-profile/lib/python3.10/site-packages/requests/adapters.py", line 81, in <module>
    _preloaded_ssl_context.load_verify_locations(
FileNotFoundError: [Errno 2] No such file or directory
[env]$
[env]$ export REQUESTS_CA_BUNDLE="${GUIX_ENVIRONMENT}/etc/ssl/certs/ca-certificates.crt"
[env]$ $ python3 test.py
Traceback (most recent call last):
  File "/tmp/test.py", line 1, in <module>
    import requests
  File "/gnu/store/17dw8qczqqz9fmj2kxzsbfqn730frqd7-profile/lib/python3.10/site-packages/requests/__init__.py", line 164, in <module>
    from .api import delete, get, head, options, patch, post, put, request
  File "/gnu/store/17dw8qczqqz9fmj2kxzsbfqn730frqd7-profile/lib/python3.10/site-packages/requests/api.py", line 11, in <module>
    from . import sessions
  File "/gnu/store/17dw8qczqqz9fmj2kxzsbfqn730frqd7-profile/lib/python3.10/site-packages/requests/sessions.py", line 15, in <module>
    from .adapters import HTTPAdapter
  File "/gnu/store/17dw8qczqqz9fmj2kxzsbfqn730frqd7-profile/lib/python3.10/site-packages/requests/adapters.py", line 81, in <module>
    _preloaded_ssl_context.load_verify_locations(
FileNotFoundError: [Errno 2] No such file or directory
```

Welp! Looks like this error is a whole different thing.

Let us try with the genenetwork2 package.

```
$ guix shell --container --network genenetwork2 coreutils
[env]$ ls "${GUIX_ENVIRONMENT}/etc"
bash_completion.d  jupyter  ld.so.cache  profile
```

This does not seem to have the certificates in place either, so let's add nss-certs

```
$ guix shell --container --network genenetwork2 coreutils nss-certs
[env]$ ls "${GUIX_ENVIRONMENT}/etc"
bash_completion.d  jupyter  ld.so.cache  profile  ssl
[env]$ python3 test.py
Traceback (most recent call last):
  File "/tmp/test.py", line 3, in <module>
    resp = requests.get("https://github.com")
  File "/gnu/store/qigjz4i0dckbsjbd2has0md2dxwsa7ry-profile/lib/python3.10/site-packages/requests/api.py", line 73, in get
    return request("get", url, params=params, **kwargs)
  File "/gnu/store/qigjz4i0dckbsjbd2has0md2dxwsa7ry-profile/lib/python3.10/site-packages/requests/api.py", line 59, in request
    return session.request(method=method, url=url, **kwargs)
  File "/gnu/store/qigjz4i0dckbsjbd2has0md2dxwsa7ry-profile/lib/python3.10/site-packages/requests/sessions.py", line 587, in request
    resp = self.send(prep, **send_kwargs)
  File "/gnu/store/qigjz4i0dckbsjbd2has0md2dxwsa7ry-profile/lib/python3.10/site-packages/requests/sessions.py", line 701, in send
    r = adapter.send(request, **kwargs)
  File "/gnu/store/qigjz4i0dckbsjbd2has0md2dxwsa7ry-profile/lib/python3.10/site-packages/requests/adapters.py", line 460, in send
    self.cert_verify(conn, request.url, verify, cert)
  File "/gnu/store/qigjz4i0dckbsjbd2has0md2dxwsa7ry-profile/lib/python3.10/site-packages/requests/adapters.py", line 263, in cert_verify
    raise OSError(
OSError: Could not find a suitable TLS CA certificate bundle, invalid path: /etc/ssl/certs/ca-certificates.crt
```

We get the expected certificates error! This is good. Now define the envvar and try again.

```
[env]$ export REQUESTS_CA_BUNDLE="${GUIX_ENVIRONMENT}/etc/ssl/certs/ca-certificates.crt"
[env]$ python3 test.py
<Response [200]>
```

Success!!!

Adding nss-certs and setting the `REQUESTS_CA_BUNDLE` fixes things. We'll need to do the same for the container, for both the genenetwork2 and genenetwork3 packages (and any other packages that use requests library).

### Fixes

