# Slurm User Guide on Octopus HPC

The Octopus HPC uses slurm. There are many online resources for using slurm on HPC, including

=> https://servicedesk.surf.nl/wiki/display/WIKI/SLURM+batch+system
=> https://www.carc.usc.edu/user-information/user-guides/hpc-basics/slurm-cheatsheet/

In this document we discuss where differences may occur. For one, Octopus is one of the busiest HPCs in the world, no kidding, because of the large scale pangenome effort at UTHSC.

As a user you will likely notice that. When you plan to fire up large jobs please discuss this on our matrix channel, otherwise jobs may get banned. Also Octopus is run by its users, pretty much in the form of a do-ocracy. Please respect our efforts.

Important warning: Octopus is non-HIPAA. Octopus is not designed to handle sensitive data. Running clinical data without the right permissions is punishable by law. Use designated HIPAA systems for that type of data and analysis.

# Useful commands

sinfo tells you about the slurm nodes:

```
export PATH=$PATH:/usr/local/bin
sinfo -a
sinfo -R # show node state
scontrol show node octopus10
```

squeue gives info about the job queue

```
squeue -l
```

sbatch allows you to submit a batch job

```
sbatch
```

To get a shell prompt on one of the nodes (useful for testing your environment)

```
srun -N 1 --mem=32G --pty /bin/bash
```

# Troubleshooting

```
scontrol show node octopus10
  Reason=Kill task failed [root@2026-04-23T15:01:19]
```

"Kill task failed" — this means Slurm tried to kill a job/task on the node (likely at job completion or cancellation) and the kill didn't succeed within the expected time. Slurm then drained the node as a precaution, since it can't guarantee the node is in a clean state.

What to check on the node:

```
ps aux | grep -E 'D|Z'
journalctl -u slurmd --since "2026-04-23 14:55"
tail -100 /var/log/slurmd.log
cat /proc/mounts
dmesg | tail -50
```

To put it back into service (once you're satisfied the node is clean):
bash

```
scontrol update NodeName=octopus10 State=resume
```

# Differences

## Guix (look ma, no modules)

No modules: Octopus does not use the venerable module system to support deployment. In contrast it uses the modern Guix packaging system. In the future we may add Nix support too.

An example of using R with guix is described here:

=> ../../hpc/guix/R

If you choose, you can still use conda, brew, spack, Python virtualenv, and what not. Userland tools will work. Even Docker or singularity may work as they work from Guix.

# Links

=> ../../octopus/links
=> ../../octopus/recent-rust
=> ../../octopus/set-up-guix-for-new-users
=> ../../octopus/running-snakemake-workflows
