# Improve Authorization Checks

## Tags

* type: improvement, refactor
* assigned: fredm
* interested: zachs, bonfacem
* keywords: gn-auth, auth, authorisation, authorization
* priority: high
* status: open

## Description

A number of lessons learnt from implementing the authorisation are:

Do the authorisation checks at the request-level rather than at the function level, otherwise, we are forced to pass a whole host of unnecessary arguments to the function being access-controlled, or maybe look into introspection to filter out the arguments to pass downstream. (writing this, it occurs to me, we could pass an authorisation bundle — a "bag" of objects used for authorisation that are not passed on down to lower-level functions).

As we discover the use-cases for different user-levels, the checks can get long and complicated. We should probably refactor these into "check functions" with names of the form "can_<action>(connections, user_id, resource_id, system_resource)" where "<action>" can be any of the various actions a user can perform on a resource, e.g. create, view/read, edit/update, delete, make-public/make-private, etc.

The complexity of checks can be demonstrated by:
=> https://git.genenetwork.org/gn-auth/commit/?id=6f1907292cb2b54b8f18b139480b1837c6f355e0 this commit.

### Notes

These expand on some of the notions above:

#### "Authorisation Bundle"

This is just a collection of objects that will be needed to compute the authorisation level a user has for any particular resource. The bundle will include (among others):

* A connection to the authorisation database: useful for fetching the user's privileges on the resource(s) in question
* A user object: represents the user acting on (a) particular resource(s)
* A resource object: represents the resource(s) being acted upon
* The system object: represents the Genenetwork system/service

#### User Levels

There are different levels any particular user of the Genenetwork system can act on the system on; examples of ones we've discovered/developed thus far:

* System Administrator Level: The user takes care of the system itself, intervening to keep it running smoothly
* System-Wide Data Curator Level: The user is concerned with maintaining and enforcing the quality of the data in the system
* Resource Owner: The user uploads and owns particular data. The data could be private or public.
* Registered Genenetwork User: A general user of Genenetwork, that has registered an account with Genenetwork. Has read/view access to all public data, and possibly access to private data granted to them by a "Resource Owner" user.
* Anonymous Genenetwork User: A general user of Genenetwork. Has read/view only access to public data on Genenetwork. This is the default access level for anyone who has not logged in.

### Tasks

* [ ] Implement new module/package for check functions
* [ ] Use new check function(s) in place of raw checks (this can be done incrementally), i.e. changed as the developer(s) work on a module
* [ ] Explore Python's introspection facility and what utility it can be for the authorisation
* [ ] 
* [ ] 
* [ ] 
* [ ] 
* [ ] 
* [ ] 
* [ ] 
* [ ] 
