# Investigate and fix "qtl2::calc_genoprob()" run due to failing with negative length vectors 

## Tags 

* Assigned: Flisso
* Interested: Bonz, Alex, Fred, Johannes 
* type: bug 
* status: in progress 
* key words: cross, qtl2, calc_genoprob, bugs 

## Description
Running subset of genotype and founders csv on qtl2 to generate founder aware smoothed genotypes. 
The script is crushing as per the followin error message:  
 
```sh
calc_genoprob failing with negative length vectors are not allowed
```
For reference, see "qtl2_hmm_pipeline.R" script: 
=> "https://github.com/fetche-lab/HS-rats-2026/blob/main/genotypes/new_processing/tests/chr1/codes/qtl2_hmm_pipeline.R" 

The following were key findings from the run, and the error: 

* Map and IDs were consistent:
* - 50,000 markers
* - no duplicate marker IDs
* - monotonic increasing cM
* Genotype dimensions:
*  - HS genotypes: 1499 x 50000
*  - Founder genotypes: 8 x 50000
* Error cause matched integer-length overflow conditions:
* The original workflow tried to allocate a genotype-probability object effectively sized around 1499 * 50000 * 36 = 2,698,200,000, which exceeds R’s 32-bit vector-length limit (2,147,483,647), causing negative length vectors are not allowed.
* So the solution was to chunk the files to 5000 lines, but still the culprit is on the calc_genoprob() runtime. 

## What is already solved 
* [x] error: "calc_genoprob failing with negative length vectors are not
    allowed)" 

## TODO
* [X] Re-run the script per specified chunks
* Observations: 
    -  
* [+] Evaluate the smoothed output for its validity and intepretability 
* [+] use the proximal/distal founder aware markers to extract snps from the original geno file. 
*  [+] or, extend a function in the script to perform this 
* [+] Test the results with gemma and rqtl2 mapping 


## An overview in steps of what I want to achieve with improved smoothing 
* GOAL: Turn raw SNP genotypes into smooth founder haplotype blocks using qtl2,
then create a reduced genotype file for QTL mapping. 

### Step 1: Load Data

* We need: 
* - Genotype file (individuals x markers) 
* - Founder genotype file (founders x markers) 
* - Genetic map file (chr, marker, cM) 
* - Cross info file 
* - YAML config file

* Load cross in R: read_cross2(“config.yaml”)

* Check: 
* - Marker names match 
* - Number of individuals correct 
* - 8 founders defined

### Step 2: Run Founder Inference (HMM)

* Run: 
* - calc_genoprob(cross, error_prob=0.002)
* This estimates the probability of each founder at every marker for every
individual.

### Step 3: Convert to Founder Probabilities

* Run: 
* - genoprob_to_alleleprob(pr)
* Now we have: 
* - markers x individuals x 8 founders
* Each marker has 8 probabilities that sum to 1.

### Step 4: Hard Call Founders

* For each marker: 
* - Pick the founder with highest probability 
* - If max probability < 0.8 → set to NA
* This removes uncertain calls.

### Step 5: Smooth the Calls

* If short NA gaps appear between the same founder: 
* - Do not break the block
* Goal: 
* - Avoid artificial recombination breakpoints. (for context, breakpoints represent haplotype boundaries among the identified blocks of markers as per the founders) 

### Step 6: Create Haplotype Blocks

* For each individual: 
* - Walk through markers in order 
* - When founder changes → breakpoint;  
* - Record block start and end

* Each block contains: 
* - Chromosome 
* - Proximal marker (start) 
* - Distal marker (end) 
* - Founder ID
* Then use the boundary markers to extract corresponding snps from the original genotype file 


### Step 7: Create Reduced Genotype File

* Output format:

```sh
chr | marker | position_type | indiv1 | indiv2 | …
```
* Each block contributes: 
* - One proximal row 
* - One distal row
* This becomes the smoothed genotype file for GEMMA or QTL mapping.

### Final Result

* Original data: 
* - Millions of SNPs

* After smoothing: 
* - Founder haplotype blocks Recombination breakpoints
* - Smaller, biologically meaningful file

The above provides context of the high level steps to be covered to get the smoothed genotypes. Challenges come on the best way to convert to a working pipeline. 





