# Our virtuoso instances

We run three instances of virtuoso.

* virtuoso on tux01 for internal use by the production server
* virtuoso on tux02 in the development (aka CI/CD) container for internal use by the CD
* virtuoso on tux02 as a public SPARQL endpoint

The public SPARQL endpoint is accessible at
=> https://sparql.genenetwork.org/sparql

## Configuration

All our virtuoso instances are deployed in Guix system containers. The configuration for these containers is at

=> https://github.com/genenetwork/genenetwork-machines/blob/main/virtuoso.scm Configuration for internal production virtuoso on tux01
=> https://github.com/genenetwork/genenetwork-machines/blob/main/genenetwork-development.scm Configuration for internal CD virtuoso on tux02
=> https://github.com/genenetwork/genenetwork-machines/blob/main/public-sparql.scm Configuration for public SPARQL endpoint virtuoso on tux02

## Ports

The ports these virtuoso instances are deployed on is subject to change, and you should really look up the Guix configuration file to find the correct port. But, here is a summary for quick lookup. Please fix this if it is inaccurate.

### Internal production virtuoso on tux01

* Server port: 8891
* SPARQL endpoint port: 8892

### Internal CD virtuoso on tux02

* Server port: 9081
* SPARQL endpoint port: 9082

### Public SPARQL endpoint virtuoso on tux02

* Server port: 8981
* SPARQL endpoint port: 8982

## Passwords

Password based authentication is required to mutate the data in these virtuoso instances. These passwords are available with Pjotr and Arun. Please contact them if you need access.
