# GeneNetwork Services

## Tags

* type: documentation
* keywords: documentation, docs, doc, services, genenetwork services

## GeneNetwork Core Services

GeneNetwork is composed of a number of different services. This document attempts to document all the services that make up GeneNetwork and document what links give access to the services.

### GeneNetwork2

This is the main user-interface to the entire GeneNetwork system.

#### Links

=> https://github.com/genenetwork/genenetwork2 Repository
=> https://genenetwork.org/ GN2 on production
=> https://fallback.genenetwork.org/ GN2 on old production
=> https://cd.genenetwork.org/ GN2 on CI/CD
=> https://staging.genenetwork.org/ GN2 on staging

### GeneNetwork3

This is the main API server for GeneNetwork.

#### Links

=> https://github.com/genenetwork/genenetwork3 Repository
=> https://genenetwork.org/api3/ GN3 on production
=> https://fallback.genenetwork.org/api3/ GN3 on old production
=> https://cd.genenetwork.org/api3/ GN3 on CI/CD
=> https://staging.genenetwork.org/api3/ GN3 on staging

### Sparql Service

The SparQL service is served from a Virtuoso-OSE service.

=> https://issues.genenetwork.org/topics/deploy/our-virtuoso-instances We have notes on our virtuoso instances here.


#### Links

=> https://github.com/genenetwork/genenetwork3 Repository
=> https://sparql.genenetwork.org/sparql/ sparql-service on production
* ??? sparql-service on old production
* ??? sparql-service on CI/CD
* ??? sparql-service on staging

### GN-Auth

This is the authorisation server for the GeneNetwork system.

#### Links

=> https://git.genenetwork.org/gn-auth/ Repository
=> https://auth.genenetwork.org/ gn-auth on production
=> https://fallback.genenetwork.org/gn-auth/ gn-auth on old production
* ??? gn-auth on CI/CD
=> https://staging-auth.genenetwork.org/ gn-auth on staging

### GN-Uploader

This service is to be used for uploading data to GeneNetwork. It is currently in development (best case, alpha).

#### Links

=> https://git.genenetwork.org/gn-uploader/ Repository
* ??? gn-uploader on production
* ??? gn-uploader on old production
* ??? gn-uploader on CI/CD
=> https://staging-uploader.genenetwork.org/ gn-uploader on staging

### Aliases Server

An extra server to respond with aliases for genetic (etc.) symbols.

This is currently a project in racket, but we should probably pull in the features in this repository into one of the others (probably GeneNetwork3) and trash this repository.

#### Links

=> https://github.com/genenetwork/gn3 Repository
=> https://genenetwork.org/gn3/ aliases-server on production
=> https://fallback.genenetwork.org/gn3/ aliases-server on old production
=> https://cd.genenetwork.org/gn3/ aliases-server on CI/CD
=> https://staging.genenetwork.org/gn3/ aliases-server on staging

### Markdown Editing Server

#### Links

=> https://git.genenetwork.org/gn-guile/ Repository
=> https://genenetwork.org/facilities/ markdown-editing-server on production
=> https://fallback.genenetwork.org/facilities/ markdown-editing-server on old production
=> https://cd.genenetwork.org/facilities/ markdown-editing-server on CI/CD
=> https://staging.genenetwork.org/facilities/ markdown-editing-server on staging

## Support Services

These are other services that support the development and maintenance of the core services.

### Issue Tracker

We use a text-based issue tracker that is accessible via
=> https://issues.genenetwork.org/

The repository for this service is at
=> https://github.com/genenetwork/gn-gemtext-threads/

### Repositories Server

This is where a lot of the genenetwork repositories live. You can access it at
=> https://git.genenetwork.org/

### Continuous Integration Service

…

=> https://ci.genenetwork.org/

### …
