# Next steps

Wednesday we had a wrap-up meeting of the gn-learning efforts.

## Data uploading

The goal of these meetings was to learn how to upload data into GN. In the process Felix has become the de facto uploader, next to Arthur. A C. elegans dataset was uploaded and Felix is preparing

* More C. elegans
* HSRat
* Kilifish
* Medaka

Updates are here:

=> https://issues.genenetwork.org/tasks/felixl

We'll keep focussing on that work and hopefully we'll get more parties interested in doing some actual work down the line.

## Hosting GN in Wageningen

Harm commented that he thought these meetings were valuable, particularly we learnt a lot about GN ins and outs. Harm suggests we focus on hosting GN in Wageningen for C. elegans and Arabidopsis.
Pjotr says that is a priority this year, even if we start on a privately hosted machine in NL. Wageningen requires Docker images and Bonface says that is possible - with some work. So:

* Host GN in NL
* Make GN specific for C.elegans and Arabidopsis - both trim and add datasets
* Create Docker container
* Host Docker container in Wageningen
* Present to other parties in Wageningen

Having above datasets will help this effort succeed.

## AI

Harm is also very interested in the AI efforts and wants to pursue that in the context of above server - i.e., functionality arrives when it lands in GN.

## Wormbase

Jameson suggest we can work with Wormbase and the Caender folks once we have a running system. Interactive data analysis is very powerful and could run in conjunction with those sites.

=> https://caendr.org/
=> https://wormbase.org/

Other efforts are Flybase and Arabidopsis Magic which we can host, in principle.

## Mapping methods

Jameson will continue with his work on risiduals.
