# Edit RIF Metadata in GN2

## Tags

* assigned: bonfacem, jnduli
* priority: high
* status: closed

## Tasks

### Viewing
* [X] API: Get WIKI/RIF by symbol from rdf.

> GET /wiki/<symbol>

```
[{
    "symbol": "XXXX",
    "reason": "XXXX",
    "species": "XXXX",
    "pubmed_ids": ["XXXX", "XXXX"], // empty array when non-existent
    "web_url": "XXXX" // Optional
    "comment": "XXXX",
    "email": "XXXX",
    "categories": ["XXXX", "XXXX"], // Enumeration
    "version": "XXXX",
    "initial": "XXXX", // Optional user or project code or your initials.
}]
```

* [X] UI: Modify traits page to have "GN2 (GeneWiki)"
* [X] UI: Integrate with API

### Editing

* [X] API: Edit comment by id in mysql/rdf: modifies GeneRIF and GeneRIFXRef tables.
* [X] API: Modify edit comments by id to include RDF changes.

> POST /wiki/<comment-id>/edit

```
{
    "symbol": "XXXX",
    "reason": "XXXX",
    "species": "XXXX",
    "pubmed_ids": ["XXXX", "XXXX"], // Optional
    "web_url": "XXXX" // Optional
    "comment": "XXXX",
    "email": "XXXX",
    "categories": ["XXXX", "XXXX"], // Enumeration
    "initial": "XXXX", // Optional user or project code or your initials.
}
```
* [X] UI: Add buttons that edit various relevant sections.
* [X] UI: Edit page needs to fetch categories from GeneCategory table.  When comment write fails, alert with error.  When comment write success, update the comment on the page, and alert with success.
* [X] API: Modify edit comments by id to include RDF changes.
* [X] GN auth integration

### History

* [X] API: End-point to fetch all the historical data
* [X] UI: Page that contains history for how comments changes.

> GET /wiki/<comment-id>/history

```
[{
    "symbol": "XXXX",
    "reason": "XXXX",
    "species": "XXXX",
    "pubmed_ids": ["XXXX", "XXXX"], // Optional
    "web_url": "XXXX" // Optional
    "comment": "XXXX",
    "email": "XXXX",
    "categories": ["XXXX", "XXXX"], // Enumeration
    "version": "XXXX",
    "initial": "XXXX", // Optional user or project code or your initials.
}]
```

### Misc ToDos:

* [X] Review performance of query used in 72d9a24e8e65 [Genenetwork3]

### Ops

* [X] RDF synchronization with SQL (gn-machines).
* [X] Update RDF in tux02.
* [X] UI: Add "edit" button after testing.

### Resolution

Genenetwork2:
=> https://github.com/genenetwork/genenetwork2/pull/858 UI/fetch rif using recent apis #858
=> https://github.com/genenetwork/genenetwork2/pull/864 Add comment history page. #864
=> https://github.com/genenetwork/genenetwork2/pull/865 Add support for auth in Rif Edit #865
=> https://github.com/genenetwork/genenetwork2/pull/866 Add a page for searching GeneWiki by symbol. #866
=> https://github.com/genenetwork/genenetwork2/pull/881 Add display page for NCBI RIF metadata. #881
=> https://github.com/genenetwork/genenetwork2/pull/881 Add display page for NCBI RIF metadata. #881
=> https://github.com/genenetwork/genenetwork2/pull/882 GN editting UI improvements #882


GeneNetwork3:
=> https://github.com/genenetwork/genenetwork3/pull/180 Update script that updates Generif_BASIC table #180
=> https://github.com/genenetwork/genenetwork3/pull/181 Add case insensitive prefixes for rif wiki #181
=> https://github.com/genenetwork/genenetwork3/pull/184 Api/get wiki from rdf #184
=> https://github.com/genenetwork/genenetwork3/pull/185 feat: add api calls to get categories and last comment #185
=> https://github.com/genenetwork/genenetwork3/pull/186 Api/fetch the latest wiki by versionid #186
=> https://github.com/genenetwork/genenetwork3/pull/187 Api/get end point to fetch all historical data #187
=> https://github.com/genenetwork/genenetwork3/pull/189 Add auth to edit RIF api call #189
=> https://github.com/genenetwork/genenetwork3/pull/190 Api/update rif queries #190 
=> https://github.com/genenetwork/genenetwork3/pull/193 Api/edit rif endpoint #193
=> https://github.com/genenetwork/genenetwork3/pull/194 Fix C0411/C0412 pylint errors in gn3.api.metadata.api.wiki. #194
=> https://github.com/genenetwork/genenetwork3/pull/195 Add rif tests #195
=> https://github.com/genenetwork/genenetwork3/pull/196 Handle missing GN3_SECRETS for CI testing. #196
=> https://github.com/genenetwork/genenetwork3/pull/197 Rif edit atomicity #197
=> https://github.com/genenetwork/genenetwork3/pull/198 Run tests against Virtuoso that is spun locally. #198
=> https://github.com/genenetwork/genenetwork3/pull/199  Add rdf-tests after the check phase. #199
=> https://github.com/genenetwork/genenetwork3/pull/200 Api/ncbi metadata #200

* closed
