# Benchmark DuckDB against LMDB for storing genotypes

# Tags

* assigned: alexm
* priority: medium
* type: feature-request
* status: open, waiting
* keywords: duckdb, lmdb, genotypes, benchmarking, parquet, qtl


# Description

Design and benchmark a DuckDB-based analytical layer for genotype data,
complementing the existing LMDB canonical storage.  The goal is to
evaluate whether a columnar relational backend can improve QTL analysis,
correlation queries, and ad-hoc exploration without sacrificing the
integrity guarantees provided by LMDB's versioned, hash-chained store.

This work is driven by the three-layer architecture proposed in the
DuckDB design document:

* Raw      – human-readable .geno files
* Canonical – LMDB (versioned truth, hash-chained integrity)
* Analytical – DuckDB + Parquet (fast columnar queries)


## Why DuckDB?

LMDB excels at keyed matrix storage, versioning, and cryptographic
verification, but it is not optimized for analytical queries such as:

* aggregations across markers or samples
* joins with phenotype tables
* filtering by chromosome position or dosage range
* exporting slices for external tools (R, Python)

DuckDB is an in-process, columnar OLAP engine that can query Parquet
files directly with full SQL support.


## Target Benchmarks

Compare DuckDB + Parquet against LMDB for the following access patterns:

| Workload | LMDB approach | DuckDB approach | Success criterion |
|----------|---------------|-----------------|-------------------|
| Random marker lookup by ID | key → matrix row | SQL SELECT on indexed marker_id | comparable latency |
| Range scan by chromosome & Mb | reconstruct full matrix, filter in Python | SQL WHERE chr = … AND Mb BETWEEN … | DuckDB faster |
| Compute mean dosage per marker | reconstruct, NumPy mean | SQL GROUP BY + AVG | DuckDB faster |
| Join with phenotype table | export to CSV/DataFrame, merge | SQL JOIN on sample_id | DuckDB significantly faster |
| Export slice for R/qtl2 | reconstruct matrix, write .csv | COPY (SELECT …) TO 'slice.parquet' | DuckDB faster |
| Storage size | LMDB delta-compressed | Parquet + SNAPPY/ZSTD | comparable or smaller |
| Ingestion time | .geno → LMDB | .geno → Parquet → DuckDB view | acceptable overhead |


## Recommended Schema (Hybrid / Normalized)

Closest to how high-performance QTL systems work.  Marker metadata is
stored once, eliminating redundancy that would bloat a long-format
table where every genotype row repeats chr, cM, and Mb.  DuckDB's
columnar engine handles joins efficiently, so normalization does not
hurt performance and improves both storage density and cache locality.

```sql
CREATE TABLE markers (
    marker_id TEXT PRIMARY KEY,
    chr       TEXT,
    cM        DOUBLE,
    Mb        DOUBLE
);

CREATE TABLE genotypes (
    dataset_id TEXT,
    marker_id  TEXT REFERENCES markers(marker_id),
    sample_id  TEXT,
    genotype   INTEGER,   -- encoded: 0=B, 1=D, 2=H, etc.
    allele_raw TEXT       -- optional: original symbol for traceability
);
```

### Alternative: Long / Tidy Format

A single denormalized table.  Useful when the priority is simplicity
(e.g., one-shot export to an external tool that expects a flat CSV).
However, it duplicates marker metadata on every row and therefore
consumes more space.

```sql
CREATE TABLE genotypes_long (
    dataset_id   TEXT,
    chr          TEXT,
    marker_id    TEXT,
    cM           DOUBLE,
    Mb           DOUBLE,
    sample_id    TEXT,
    genotype     INTEGER,
    allele_raw   TEXT
);
```

Avoid the wide-format (one column per strain) because it requires DDL
changes for every new sample.


## Ingestion Pipeline

Step 1 — Parse raw .geno (same as LMDB importer):
* skip lines starting with # or @
* parse header row: Chr Locus cM Mb BXD1 BXD2 …
* extract @ metadata into separate structure

Step 2 — Light cleaning:
* U / - / empty → NULL
* B/D/H → encoded integers (or defer to analytical layer)
* validate consistent row length

Step 3 — Split into normalized tables:
* markers  → (marker_id, chr, cM, Mb)
* genotypes → (dataset_id, marker_id, sample_id, genotype, allele_raw)

Step 4 — Export to Parquet:
```python
import duckdb
con = duckdb.connect()
con.execute("""
    COPY (SELECT * FROM read_csv_auto('markers.csv'))
    TO 'markers.parquet' (FORMAT PARQUET, COMPRESSION 'ZSTD')
""")
con.execute("""
    COPY (SELECT * FROM read_csv_auto('genotypes.csv'))
    TO 'genotypes.parquet' (FORMAT PARQUET, COMPRESSION 'ZSTD')
""")
```

Step 5 — Create DuckDB views:
```sql
CREATE VIEW markers_latest AS
SELECT * FROM read_parquet('markers.parquet');

CREATE VIEW genotypes_latest AS
SELECT * FROM read_parquet('genotypes.parquet');
```

Step 6 — Analysis example (range scan + aggregation):
```sql
SELECT g.marker_id, m.chr, m.Mb, AVG(g.genotype) AS mean_dosage
FROM genotypes_latest g
JOIN markers_latest m USING (marker_id)
WHERE m.chr = '1' AND m.Mb BETWEEN 50 AND 60
GROUP BY g.marker_id, m.chr, m.Mb;
```


## Integration with LMDB

LMDB remains the canonical source of truth.  The DuckDB layer is a
one-way, idempotent export:

```
.geno ──► LMDB (canonical, versioned)
   │
   └── reconstruct version N ──► split markers + genotypes ──► Parquet
                                          │
                                          ▼
                                    DuckDB analytical views
```

When a dataset is updated in LMDB, the export pipeline is re-run to
regenerate the Parquet files.  DuckDB never writes back to LMDB.


## Prototype Tasks

* [ ] implement .geno → normalized markers + genotypes converter (reuse LMDB parser logic)
* [ ] benchmark Parquet write times and file sizes against LMDB for BXD, HS, and Kilifish panels
* [ ] create DuckDB schema and load views for at least one panel
* [ ] run marker-range scan benchmark (chr + Mb filter) and compare with LMDB reconstruction + Python filter
* [ ] run mean-dosage benchmark (GROUP BY marker_id) and compare with LMDB + NumPy
* [ ] run phenotype-join benchmark and compare with LMDB → DataFrame merge
* [ ] measure ingestion pipeline end-to-end time
* [ ] document Guix shell environment (duckdb python package + pyarrow)
* [ ] write ADR if DuckDB proves beneficial


## Open Questions

1. Should we maintain a persistent DuckDB database file, or rely on
   on-the-fly Parquet scanning?
2. Can we attach LMDB directly via a DuckDB custom scanner, avoiding
   the intermediate Parquet step?
3. How does DuckDB perform when multiple panels are queried together
   (e.g., UNION ALL across datasets)?
4. What is the memory footprint for large panels (>10k markers × >1k
   samples) in DuckDB versus LMDB reconstruction?


## References

* => /issues/genotyping-lmdb.gmi LMDB genotype storage (canonical layer)
* => /issues/dumping-probesets-to-lmdb.gmi Dumping Probesets to LMDB
* => /issues/optimize-correlations-with-lmdb.g LMDB correlation optimization
* => https://duckdb.org/docs/guides/file_formats/parquet_import DuckDB Parquet documentation
