# Modelling Phenotype Data

* assigned: robw, bonfacem
* tags: critical
* contact: pjotrp

## Introduction

Consider the following columns from our phenotype
table:

* Pre_publication_description
* Post_publication_description
* Original_description
* Pre_publication_abbreviation
* Post_publication_abbreviation

Ideally, all traits in GeneNetwork have pre- and post- descriptions and abbreviations upon initial data entry.  This however is not the case.

Also, it's not always the case that pre- and post- data are the same as evidenced by:

```
MariaDB [db_webqtl]> SELECT COUNT(*) FROM Phenotype where Pre_publication_description != Post_publication_description AND Post_publication_description IS NOT NULL AND  Pre_publication_description IS NOT NULL;
+----------+
| COUNT(*) |
+----------+
|     4684 |
+----------+
1 row in set (0.03 sec)
```

Pre- descriptions/abbreviations are shown until a PMID is attached.  However, for many users, they forget to attach the PMID after the paper has been published.  Regardless, many traits in GN are never published and their value is a function of the full "post" description.

We should explore pre-linking pre-prints with canonical publications---to avoid duplication---after the RDF work.

## Edge Cases With How We Store Traits

There is an on-going discussion on how to store private/public traits.  How we store traits is inconsistent.  This section explains why this is the case.

* There are "hanging" traits.  In this case, we have cases where we have given metadata about a given trait, but we have no associated vectors.  In such a case, we have no clear way of knowing whether that trait is public or private.  Here's a query that displays all these cases:

```
MariaDB [db_webqtl]> SELECT COUNT(*) FROM Phenotype LEFT JOIN PublishXRef ON Phenotype.Id = PublishXRef.PhenotypeId WHERE PublishXRef.Id IS NULL;
+----------+
| COUNT(*) |
+----------+
|      210 |
+----------+
1 row in set (0.06 sec)
```

* Some traits do not have an associated pmid.  This is expeceted since some of these traits are unpublished.  However, we have cases where a trait doesn't have a pmid in the relevant column, but has a pmid embedded as part of the abstract.  Here's an example (Notice that PubMed_ID is NULL and the pmid is embeeded in the Abstract):

```
       Id: 284
PubMed_ID: NULL
 Abstract: Entered by RWW, Dec 1, 2004. Minimum SE of 0.5. Range of N from 2 to 8 with mean of 4.1. Dr. Jucker comments that data are very solid with possible exception of BXD33 and BXD35. BXD33 (31.7) and BXD35 (196.7) removed by MJ and RW, Sept 2006.  Authors: Jucker M, Williams RW, and colleagues (<mathias.jucker@uni-tuebingen.de> see PMID 11113616)
    Title: Structural brain aging in inbred mice: potential for genetic linkage
  Journal: Exp Gerontol
   Volume: 35
    Pages: 1383-1389
    Month: Unknown
     Year: 2000
*************************** 2. row ***************************
       Id: 285
PubMed_ID: NULL
 Abstract: Entered by RWW, Dec 1, 2004. (<mathias.jucker@uni-tuebingen.de> unpublished data, see PMID 11113616)  Authors: Jucker M and colleagues (<mathias.jucker@uni-tuebingen.de>unpublished data, see PMID 11113616)    Title: Structural brain aging in inbred mice: potential for genetic linkage
  Journal: Exp Gerontol
   Volume: 35
    Pages: 1383-1389
    Month: Unknown
     Year: 2000
*************************** 3. row ***************************
       Id: 286
PubMed_ID: NULL Abstract: Entered by RWW, Dec 1, 2004. Males have lower counts than females.

(<mjucker@uhbs.ch> unpublished data, see PMID 11113616)
  Authors: Jucker M
```

* As evidenced in the example above, we have publications that are the same, the only different thing being the abstract.  Are these duplicates essentially the same thing?  Or is it important to retain this information?

* We have traits that are marked as "public".  We have a "confidential" and "public" flag that identify a trait as either public or private.  However, we have cases where a trait is marked as public, but the abstract indicates otherwise.  Currently there are 4 entries that I'm aware of.  Here's an example:

```
SELECT PublishFreeze.Public AS Public, PublishFreeze.confidentiality AS Confidentiality,  Publication.* FROM Phenotype LEFT JOIN PublishXRef ON Phenotype.Id = PublishXRef.PhenotypeId LEFT JOIN Publication ON Publication.Id = PublishXRef.PublicationId LEFT JOIN PublishFreeze ON PublishFreeze.InbredSetId = PublishXRef.InbredSetId LEFT JOIN InfoFiles ON InfoFiles.InfoPageName = PublishFreeze.Name WHERE PublishFreeze.public > 0 AND PublishFreeze.confidentiality < 1 AND PubMed_ID IS NULL AND Publication.Abstract LIKE "%confidential%" LIMIT 1 \G


         Public: 2
Confidentiality: 0
             Id: 621
      PubMed_ID: NULL
       Abstract: Made confidential March 31, 2011.
Lipoteichoic acid (LTA) IL6 response of peritoneal macrophages in vitro (overnight), ELISA assay [pg/ml]Entered Aug 24, 2006 by DL Hasty and RW Williams. LTA response of macrophages. The third experiment is the one that David showed you the data for.  "There is only one value per animal due to the low number of macrophages we were getting."
        Authors: Hasty DL, Cox KH
          Title: LTA stimulation of  macrophages
        Journal: Unknown
         Volume: Unknown
          Pages: Unknown
          Month: Unknown
           Year: 2006
```


## Meeting Agenda

Date: TBA

### We have inconsistent data as pointed above.  What are peoples comments about it?

* Provide Rob list of traits that are hanging.
* PMIDs embedded in abstract - rare occurence.
* Data may appear to be the same; but vary slightly e.g. different units
* Quality of curation is poor.  People generally don't worry about their old data.
Good curation: good description.

### How do we handle private/public data and metadata?  Data is the vectors of numbers; metadata include pre/post publication/abbreviation.  Is there a difference between the terms confidential public when it comes to storing data?

* Mouse data more than 4 y/o.
* Scientists -> story tellers.
* Competitors - people hoard data.  GN storing private data, and access goes through channels.  People care about metadata to hide what they are working on.

### Given the above problem, what's the FAIR way to go about it?  How do we allow sharing data that even encourages the paranoid?

* Good authentication/authorization.
* People upload temp data.  Give the paranoid the ability to hide data within GN.  After they publish, they can make it public.
* When there's a pubmed-id, the data is public.
* Communicating with authors is a hassle.
* Provide a DOI for people before publishing.
* Temp traits upload page could add "encourage" people?  Discourage people from temp traits I.e. Limit temp traits.
* Expire temp traits.
* Make assumptions GN makes about data (E.g. all pmid data is public) explicit.
* Eventually, all data will be public in the context of GN.
* Getting higher quality data in GN (priority).  Make contributors feel secure.
* For private data, expose the pre-publication data.
* Pre, post, published data with a tag of whether private or public and share with Rob/Arthur (in ms word).
* Full time expert curator.  Automating this.
