
# LMDB-Based Correlation Computation Report

* Assigned: alexm
* Status: in-progress

## Introduction

This report summarizes the results obtained from running correlation
computations on the exon dataset (UMUTAffyExon_0209_RMA) using the
`correlation_rust` program.

The focus of this report is the workflow that successfully executed
and the observed performance when computing correlations.

The dataset is stored in LMDB and was converted to CSV for processing.

## Tasks

* [x] Report on running the exon dataset with LMDB
* [x] Implement interface for reading LMDB directly
* [-] Add this as a test feature to CI/CD
* [ ] Explore optimizations such as parallel computation

## Dataset Description

Dataset structure:

* Number of samples: 93
* Number of traits: 1,236,087

Each row represents a trait and each column represents a sample.

### Output File Information

```

wc -l output.csv
1236087 output.csv

```
```

-rw-r--r-- 1 alexm alexm 867M Mar 11 03:57 output.csv

```

The generated CSV file is approximately **867 MB** and contains
**1,236,087 rows**, each corresponding to a trait.

Example row:

```

5.17816,5.04923,6.71493,5.52693,5.02245,5.21265,5.51605,5.40495,...

```

Each row contains **93 values**, corresponding to the samples.

## Data Workflow

The workflow that successfully ran:

* Expression data stored in an LMDB database
* LMDB records converted into a CSV matrix file
* CSV file used as input for the Rust correlation program

Program execution command:

```

cargo run ./tests/data/sample_json_file.json

```

## Correlation Computation

Two correlation methods were executed:

* Pearson correlation
* Spearman correlation

Both computations were run using Cargo in **debug** and **release** modes.

## Performance Results

### Pearson Correlation

Debug execution:

```

Finished `dev` profile [unoptimized + debuginfo]
Elapsed: 50.63s

```

Release execution:

```

Finished `release` profile [optimized]
Elapsed: 10.13s

```

### Spearman Correlation

Debug execution:

```

Finished `dev` profile [unoptimized + debuginfo]
Elapsed: 59.92s

```

Release execution:

```

Finished `release` profile [optimized]
Elapsed: 19.31s

```

## Data Dimensions Confirmed During Execution

```

len(l[0]) -> 93

```

This corresponds to:

* 93 samples
* 1,236,087 traits

## Observations

The correlation program successfully processed the exon dataset
containing more than **1.2 million traits**.

Key observations:

* Pearson correlation completed in about **10 seconds** in release mode
* Spearman correlation completed in about **19 seconds** in release mode
* Debug mode execution is significantly slower due to the lack of compiler optimization

The workflow of converting LMDB data to CSV and running the Rust
correlation program completed successfully and produced the expected results.

## Summary

The experiment demonstrated that the `correlation_rust` program can
compute correlations on a large dataset with:

* 93 samples
* 1,236,087 traits
* 867 MB matrix file

Observed execution times:

* Pearson: ~50.63 s (debug), ~10.13 s (release)
* Spearman: ~59.92 s (debug), ~19.31 s (release)

The LMDB → CSV workflow successfully enabled correlation computation
across the full dataset.

## After Adding the LMDB Correlation Interface

The new approach reads directly from the LMDB database rather than
converting the dataset to CSV.

=> https://github.com/Alexanderlacuna/correlation_rust/pull/6/changes Rust implementation

### Updated Performance Results

#### Pearson Correlation
Debug mode:

```

Elapsed: 23.55s

```
Release mode:

```

Elapsed: 4.33s

```

#### Spearman Correlation

Debug mode:

```

Elapsed: 33.59s

```

Release mode:

```
Elapsed: 15s

