# R/qtl JSONDecodeError

When we have a deployment problem R/qtl throws this error. It comes from the GN3 API and it means there is some problem with the R code. Obviously GN2 should show a proper error message. Not only that, there should be a hint in the logs and we should test for regressions.

* [ ] Give informative message
* [ ] Log in error log
* [X] Add test regressions

## Info

Now qtlreaper works. That suggests a problem with R. Zach says there is a problem with the load path in

=> ./genenetwork3/scripts/rqtl_wrapper.R

The current Guix profile is in

```
export GN2_PROFILE=/home/zas1024/opt/gn-latest-20221206
```

So we can run a shell

```
source /home/zas1024/opt/gn-latest-20221206/etc/profile
```

and test the script with

```
gn2@tux01:~/production$ Rscript ./genenetwork3/scripts/rqtl_wrapper.R
```

This works fine, so there is no path problem that I can tell. At least with the load path.

Now, on production we have two flask servers running on port 8081 and 8087. According to production settings the last is used, probably in a tmux. Zach has written

=> ../topics/starting_gn2_and_gn3.gmi

which uses the same startup profile but uses a different port number(!)

## GN3

After restarting GN3 properly we are getting errors on R/qtl

```
Fatal error: cannot open file 'None': No such file or directory
[2022-12-23 16:39:30,575] ERROR in app: Exception on /api/rqtl/compute [POST]
Traceback (most recent call last):
  File "/gnu/store/lj173vcx5w60mzp203x17p7yhcz5ifwx-profile/lib/python3.9/site-packages/flask/app.py", line 2077, in wsgi_app
    response = self.full_dispatch_request()
  File "/gnu/store/lj173vcx5w60mzp203x17p7yhcz5ifwx-profile/lib/python3.9/site-packages/flask/app.py", line 1525, in full_dispatch_request
    rv = self.handle_user_exception(e)
  File "/gnu/store/lj173vcx5w60mzp203x17p7yhcz5ifwx-profile/lib/python3.9/site-packages/flask/app.py", line 1523, in full_dispatch_request
    rv = self.dispatch_request()
  File "/gnu/store/lj173vcx5w60mzp203x17p7yhcz5ifwx-profile/lib/python3.9/site-packages/flask/app.py", line 1509, in dispatch_request
    return self.ensure_sync(self.view_functions[rule.endpoint])(**req.view_args)
  File "/home/gn2/gn3_production/genenetwork3/gn3/api/rqtl.py", line 55, in compute
    rqtl_output['results'] = process_rqtl_mapping(rqtl_cmd.get('output_file'))
  File "/home/gn2/gn3_production/genenetwork3/gn3/computations/rqtl.py", line 65, in process_rqtl_mapping
    with open(
FileNotFoundError: [Errno 2] No such file or directory: '/tmp/output/d41d8cd98f00b204e9800998ecf8427eLnBwXfCEpZ9SqYsOI0dPtAvGj6hf+TA2Ra7FIrlrT4Pw-output.csv'
```

Some issues there. First of all, why are we using /tmp? TMPDIR should be set to something that gets cleaned up. It looks like /tmp/output is not created(!?). Trying

```
mkdir /tmp/output
```

Gives the same error, suggesting that R has not done its thing.

## Another error

Another error shows up

```
[2022-12-23 16:42:14,906] ERROR in app: Exception on /api/search/ [GET]
Traceback (most recent call last):
  File "/gnu/store/lj173vcx5w60mzp203x17p7yhcz5ifwx-profile/lib/python3.9/site-packages/flask/app.py", line 2077, in wsgi_app
    response = self.full_dispatch_request()
  File "/gnu/store/lj173vcx5w60mzp203x17p7yhcz5ifwx-profile/lib/python3.9/site-packages/flask/app.py", line 1525, in full_dispatch_request
    rv = self.handle_user_exception(e)
  File "/gnu/store/lj173vcx5w60mzp203x17p7yhcz5ifwx-profile/lib/python3.9/site-packages/flask/app.py", line 1523, in full_dispatch_request
    rv = self.dispatch_request()
  File "/gnu/store/lj173vcx5w60mzp203x17p7yhcz5ifwx-profile/lib/python3.9/site-packages/flask/app.py", line 1509, in dispatch_request
    return self.ensure_sync(self.view_functions[rule.endpoint])(**req.view_args)
  File "/home/gn2/gn3_production/genenetwork3/gn3/api/search.py", line 45, in search_results
    with xapian_database(current_app.config["XAPIAN_DB_PATH"]) as db:
  File "/gnu/store/qar3sks5fwzm91bl3d3ngyrvxs7ipj5z-python-3.9.9/lib/python3.9/contextlib.py", line 119, in __enter__
    return next(self.gen)
  File "/home/gn2/gn3_production/genenetwork3/gn3/db_utils.py", line 55, in xapian_database
    db = xapian.Database(path)
  File "/gnu/store/lj173vcx5w60mzp203x17p7yhcz5ifwx-profile/lib/python3.9/site-packages/xapian/__init__.py", line 8483, in __init__
    _xapian.Database_swiginit(self, _xapian.new_Database(*args))
xapian.DatabaseOpeningError: Couldn't stat 'xapian' (No such file or directory)
```

## Test regression

A test has been added to sheepdog using a POST request. See

=> ../topics/testing/using-curl.gmi
