# 'TempDataSet' object has no attribute 'query_for_group' (error)

## Tags

* assigned: alex
* priority: high
* type: bug
* status: unclear
* keywords: TempDataSet, from github

## Description

=> https://github.com/genenetwork/genenetwork2/issues/592 From GitHub

After successful entry of new BXD trait data (both my own data and the example BXD set from the website), I tried to correlate the trait with the BXD phenotypes, by clicking the correlate button. This produced the error below:

GeneNetwork tux01:gene:2.11-rc2-staging-427071fc7 http://www.genenetwork.org/corr_compute (12:29PM UTC Jul 16, 2021)
'TempDataSet' object has no attribute 'query_for_group' (error)
File "/export/local/home/gn2/production/gene/wqflask/base/data_set.py", line 334, in init
dataset.query_for_group)




Hi Rob and Zachary,

Thanks for getting back so quickly. There is no urgency for me. I managed
to upload the trait as a batch file in the old version of genenetwork.

The trait data that I tried to upload and check on GN2 was the
median-lateral position of the representation of visual space on V1. It was
old data that we had, but never uploaded, because we were investigating a
specific cross for another location trait with an interesting QTL. Rob,
your email spiked my interest again. I'll send a reply in the next few days.

For testing purposes, the trait sequence was : X X X 0.3391 0.2467 0.6381 X
0.244 X 0.5926 0.3004 0.6346 0.3103 0.3372 X 0.4933 0.4008 0.404 X 0.4062 X
0.484 X X X 0.3358 0.3724 0.2757 X 0.2401 0.3712 0.2365 0.3328 X 0.3525 X X
0.3288 0.3354 X 0.4069 X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X
X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X
X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X
X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X
X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X
X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X
but also the sample from the website did not work for me.




@bonfacem might also be interested in this issue
