# Weekly meetings

In this document we will track tasks based of our weekly meetings. This list sets the agenda
on progress for the next week's meeting.

## @bonfacem

* [ ] Report:    OpenAI on Aider - use AI for programming - discuss with @alexm

=> https://issues.genenetwork.org/topics/ai/aider

* [ ] Metadata:  Provide list of case attributes for BXD to @flisso
* [ ] Code UI:   GeneRIF and GenWiki should work from the mapping page - encourage people to use
                 - anyone logged in can edit
                 - If RIF does not exist point to GeneWiki
                 - If GeneWiki does not exist provide edit page
* [ ] Code export: Exporting traits to lmdb PublishData - @alexm helps with SQL
                 - missing data should not be an X
                 - run lmdb design (first code) by @pjotrp
                 - start exporting traits for Johannes (he will need to write a python reader)
* Later:         Improve the work/dev container for @alexm

## @flisso

* [ ] Write:  Uploader protocol
* [ ] Script: Run Reaper
* [ ] Data:  Case attributes - with @bonfacem
* [ ] Write:  Create protocol to upload case attributes

## @alexm

* [ ] Code: Rqtl2 match Rqtl1: match scan changes
* [ ] Bug:  Fix pair scan
* Later: AI changes

## Pjotr

* [ ] Code: Work on precompute with GEMMA (w. Jameson)
* [ ] Code: Take Bonface's trait files when they become available
