# guix build gn-uploader: error

## Tags

* assigned: fredm, aruni
* status: closed
* priority: critical
* type: bug
* keywords: guix, gn-uploader

## Description

Trying to build `gn-uploader` with

> $ guix build -L /home/frederick/genenetwork/guix-bioinformatics gn-uploader

in my local development fails with:

```
︙
ice-9/boot-9.scm:1685:16: In procedure raise-exception:
In procedure utime: No such file or directory
builder for `/gnu/store/i8pxiq0xlal1z4ifgqplvhizraj75lc3-gn-uploader-0.0.1-bf4f7c56.drv' failed with exit code 1
build of /gnu/store/i8pxiq0xlal1z4ifgqplvhizraj75lc3-gn-uploader-0.0.1-bf4f7c56.drv failed
View build log at '/var/log/guix/drvs/i8/pxiq0xlal1z4ifgqplvhizraj75lc3-gn-uploader-0.0.1-bf4f7c56.drv.gz'.
guix build: error: build of `/gnu/store/i8pxiq0xlal1z4ifgqplvhizraj75lc3-gn-uploader-0.0.1-bf4f7c56.drv' failed
```

with the file having some of the following

```
︙
phase `unpack' succeeded after 48.0 seconds
starting phase `ensure-no-mtimes-pre-1980'
error: in phase 'ensure-no-mtimes-pre-1980': uncaught exception:
system-error "utime" "~A" ("No such file or directory") (2)
phase `ensure-no-mtimes-pre-1980' failed after 0.0 seconds
Backtrace:
  13 (primitive-load "/gnu/store/qhg4m0nrrs3862fk9nzgxxrc0hj…")
In guix/build/gnu-build-system.scm:
  908:2 12 (gnu-build #:source _ #:outputs _ #:inputs _ #:phases . #)
In ice-9/boot-9.scm:
  1752:10 11 (with-exception-handler _ _ #:unwind? _ # _)
︙
```

Building on tux02 with the same commit raises the error

```
︙
ice-9/boot-9.scm:1685:16: In procedure raise-exception:
In procedure copy-file: No space left on device
note: build failure may have been caused by lack of free disk space
builder for `/gnu/store/ra3f63zk1jr980vbhgcx5ssifr87bq8n-gn-uploader-0.0.1-bf4f7c56.drv' failed with exit code 1
build of /gnu/store/ra3f63zk1jr980vbhgcx5ssifr87bq8n-gn-uploader-0.0.1-bf4f7c56.drv failed
View build log at '/var/log/guix/drvs/ra/3f63zk1jr980vbhgcx5ssifr87bq8n-gn-uploader-0.0.1-bf4f7c56.drv.gz'.
guix build: error: build of `/gnu/store/ra3f63zk1jr980vbhgcx5ssifr87bq8n-gn-uploader-0.0.1-bf4f7c56.drv' failed
```

with the error file containing

```
︙
`/gnu/store/h0zywgd0i8m6ssnyq5ngx34r1c26a65s-git-checkout/tests/test_data/standarderror_1_error_at_end.tsv' -> `./tests/test_data/standarderror_1_error_at_end.tsv'
error: in phase 'unpack': uncaught exception:
system-error "copy-file" "~A" ("No space left on device") (28) 
phase `unpack' failed after 2.8 seconds
Backtrace:
          17 (primitive-load "/gnu/store/qhg4m0nrrs3862fk9nzgxxrc0hj<E2><80><A6>")
In guix/build/gnu-build-system.scm:
    908:2 16 (gnu-build #:source _ #:outputs _ #:inputs _ #:phases . #)
In ice-9/boot-9.scm:
︙
ice-9/boot-9.scm:1685:16: In procedure raise-exception:
In procedure copy-file: No space left on device
```

There is plenty of space on the tux02:

```
$ df -h /gnu /tmp
Filesystem      Size  Used Avail Use% Mounted on
/dev/nvme1n1p5  117G   82G   29G  74% /gnu
/dev/nvme1n1p2   30G   26G  2.1G  93% /
```

so we know that's not a problem.

A similar thing had shown up on space.uthsc.edu.

### More Troubleshooting Efforts

I have attempted to do ~guix pull~ in case the version of guix I had was the problem to no avail.

I have even attempted checking out
=> https://git.genenetwork.org/guix-bioinformatics/commit/?h=fred-updates-20240313&id=869598d39a532c6acc83bb0b9d21baaa79476973 commit 869598d39a532c6acc83bb0b9d21baaa79476973
and creating a branch from it then
=> https://git.genenetwork.org/guix-bioinformatics/commit/?h=fred-updates-20240313&id=4105a3e463982f46dcc9a537267fb77bb2322b9a updating the commit and hash
in the new branch, but I still get the same failures above.

## Solutions


### "In procedure copy-file: No space left on device" Error (Tux02)

In tux02, the issue was, after all, a lack of space. Fixed by telling the daemon to use a different directory on a partition with more space as its TMPDIR. That fixes the "No space left on device" error. We do that by adding the following to the systemd unit file for the guix daemon:

```
ENVIRONMENT='TMPDIR=/export/tmp'
```

Now the system fails with the same error as local dev.

### system-error "utime" "~A" ("No such file or directory") (2)

I previously renamed `.guix/modules/gnqc-py.scm` to `.guix/modules/gn-uploader.scm` but forgot to update the symbolic link, and that lead to the error above. This has been fixed now.

### In procedure utime: No such file or directory

The `etc/default_config.py` file was not being installed into the store for some reason, leading to the "No such file or directory" error.

I fixed this by moving the file into the `qc_app` module.

I renamed the file to "default_settings.py" for consistency with other GN services.
